docs/source/data.rst, before:

Data format
===========

Overview
--------

The data format used in all scripts is based on the `Astropy Table
<http://docs.astropy.org/en/stable/table/>`_ format. In the `Building
the table`_ section, we show how these Astropy Tables are create from
the DM bulter. This work is automaticaly done for the `meas` and
`forced` catalogs, and then saved together in one single `hdf5
<http://www.h5py.org/>`_ file. The procedure to write and read these
files is describe in the `Saving / reading the table`_ section. In the
`Working with the table`_, we show how you can use these tables to run
your analysis or make plots.


Build the table
------------------

The main table is built from the LSST DM butler as shown in the
diagram [#]_ below:

.. image:: https://cdn.rawgit.com/nicolaschotard/Clusters/master/docs/source/_static/data-table-1.1.svg
   :scale: 100 %
   :alt: Data table construction
   :align: center

For each filter `f`, an Astropy Table is create for all available
patches `p1`, `p2`, etc. Since we have the same amount of patches for
all filters, which contain the exact same amount of sources, all table
(1,p), (2,p), etc., created from a patch will be of the same size for
all filter. The Astropy Tables created from all individual
filters/pathes set will then be verticaly stacked. This means that if
we respecively have `N1`, `N2` and `N3` sources for the patches 1, 2
and 3, the output table will contains `N1` + `N2` + `N3`
sources. After the first stack, we end up with one table per filter,
all containing the same number of sources. These per-filter tables are
finaly stacked together to form the final table shown on the
right-hand side of the diagram.

--------

.. [#] Diagram created using https://www.jgraph.com/. Use the
       https://www.draw.io/?demo=1 application and the last xml file
       from this repository to update the diagram if needed.


Work with the table
----------------------

Asptroy tables are great to work with, and can be used for all kind of
analysis in the context of our cluster study. You can apply filters,
group by column, concatenate them, etc. For a detailed review on
Astropy tables, see `there <http://docs.astropy.org/en/stable/table/>`_.

Commit message:

Work on the data documentation

docs/source/data.rst, after:

Data format
===========

Overview
--------

The data format used in all scripts is based on the `Astropy Table
<http://docs.astropy.org/en/stable/table/>`_ format. In the `Build the
table`_ section, we show how these Astropy Tables are create from the
DM bulter. This work is automaticaly done for the `meas` and `forced`
catalogs, and then saved together in one single `hdf5
<http://www.h5py.org/>`_ file. The procedures to write and read these
files, and work with the loaded tables, are describe in the `Work with
the table`_ section.


Build the table
---------------

The main table is built from the LSST DM butler as shown in the
diagram [#]_ below:

.. image:: https://cdn.rawgit.com/nicolaschotard/Clusters/master/docs/source/_static/data-table-1.1.svg
   :scale: 100 %
   :alt: Data table construction
   :align: center

For each filter `f`, an Astropy Table is create for all available
patches `p1`, `p2`, etc. Since we have the same amount of patches for
all filters, which contain the exact same amount of sources, all table
(1,p), (2,p), etc., created from a patch will be of the same size for
all filter. The Astropy Tables created from all individual
filters/pathes set will then be verticaly stacked. This means that if
we respecively have `N1`, `N2` and `N3` sources for the patches 1, 2
and 3, the output table will contains `N1` + `N2` + `N3`
sources. After the first stack, we end up with one table per filter,
all containing the same number of sources. These per-filter tables are
finaly stacked together to form the final table shown on the
right-hand side of the diagram.

--------

.. [#] Diagram created using https://www.jgraph.com/. Use the
       https://www.draw.io/?demo=1 application and the last xml file
       from this repository to update the diagram if needed.


Work with the table
-------------------

.. include:: data_tuto.rst
